It's mid-morning in the backcountry
of central Oregon.
I can see it.
Where?
What? You tell me when you can see it.
Troy Capps and his family are on a mission.
They're searching for antlers.
It's just excitement, I guess, of being
out there and walking around and when you
find one, realizing that you're standing
right there at the moment that deer dropped
its antlers. It's pretty exciting to know:
it was right here, and I found it.
That's what we're looking for right there
Deer and elk naturally lose their antlers
every year. It's kind of like when a child
loses a baby tooth.
Three point.
Call Teresa, you gotta tell her.
Found one.
The sport of searching for them is called
shed hunting.
Bu tot everyone is as ethical as the Capps'
family.
Hunting for antlers can seem like a harmless,
fun game. But there's an ugly side.
Shed hunting is illegal when people trespass
onto private property or protected areas.
When nobody is watching some people will chase
elk on foot or with ATVs.
The stress of being chased can make elk shed
their antlers prematurely. It can also spark
a stampede.
And stampeding elk can end up sick, injured
or dead.
This kind of activity prompted Capps to help
start Oregon Shed Hunters to promote ethical
shed hunting. No cutting fences, no destroying
habitat, no harassing animals to get them
to drop their antlers faster.
You're an official Oregon Shed Hunter.
I guess I am. That's not bad.
That is really good.
To be out there with an ATV trying to chase
you know a deer around until it drops. Or
even being out there running around. That's
just not healthy for them, and it's not
healthy for the sport.
You've probably seen antlers used as art
or to build furniture.
Hunters can sell antlers for up to 35 dollars
a pound. A prized set of antlers from a trophy
elk can bring in thousands.
The commercial market on these is... People like to just have them around. Some people do.
Wildlife enforcement officer Richard Mann
is on the watch for illegal shed hunting in
Central Washington.
He says it's especially cruel. Illegal shed
hunters chase elk when the animals are at
their most vulnerable.
They're in poor body condition, not a lot
of fat left, so if they're made to run, they're stressed.
It puts them in a condition where they may
not fall dead when you're looking at them
right then, but up to a day or two after that
stress has occurred it has an impact on them.
And we lose elk, they die because of it.
If caught in a closed wintering area, illegal
shed hunters get a trespassing ticket. Citations
can be as steep as $1,000. But they're usually
lower than that.
I view it as almost theft. It's theft. Theft
of either the opportunity, theft of resources.
And that all effects all of our citizens who
enjoy it. Like to come out, like the opportunity
to come out and find just one antler.
It's legal to search for antlers all year,
as long as the place you're looking is not
closed to protect animals.
Come on, go on. Let's go for a walk.
One Northwest group is working to protect
elk on their wintering grounds. Kyle Winton
is the co-founder of Eyes in the Woods.
We're taking a camera that was a problem camera out in the field
and I'm testing it to see if it still continues to fail
The group hides cameras in closed areas. They've
caught people with ATVs, people with dogs,
and people on foot.
Our hopes is that we can actually be the deterrent
out there, rather than the people that, 'You did it'
pointing fingers
Winton says illegal hunters stockpile antlers
they've collected all winter. Then they
carry the antlers out when the gates open.
It's amazing how they can find that many in
a short time but how can you question
em, cause how can you prove it? So by us being
there, hopefully we can catch them going into those caches.
It's dawn on May 1, the opening day of shed
hunting at Oak Creek Wildlife Area outside
of Yakima.
These hunters are playing by the rules -- they've
waited all winter. Some camped out all night
to be among the first to enter.
By now, the elk have migrated into the mountains,
safely away from the ruckus.